From Program Veriﬁcation to Program Synthesis

Saurabh Srivastava

Sumit Gulwani

Jeffrey S. Foster

University of Maryland, College Park
saurabhs@cs.umd.edu

Microsoft Research, Redmond
sumitg@microsoft.com

University of Maryland, College Park
jfoster@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
This paper describes a novel technique for the synthesis of imper-
ative programs. Automated program synthesis has the potential to
make programming and the design of systems easier by allowing
programs to be speciﬁed at a higher-level than executable code. In
our approach, which we call proof-theoretic synthesis, the user pro-
vides an input-output functional speciﬁcation, a description of the
atomic operations in the programming language, and a speciﬁca-
tion of the synthesized program’s looping structure, allowed stack
space, and bound on usage of certain operations. Our technique
synthesizes a program, if there exists one, that meets the input-
output speciﬁcation and uses only the given resources.

The insight behind our approach is to interpret program synthe-
sis as generalized program veriﬁcation, which allows us to bring
veriﬁcation tools and techniques to program synthesis. Our syn-
thesis algorithm works by creating a program with unknown state-
ments, guards, inductive invariants, and ranking functions. It then
generates constraints that relate the unknowns and enforces three
kinds of requirements: partial correctness, loop termination, and
well-formedness conditions on program guards. We formalize the
requirements that program veriﬁcation tools must meet to solve
these constraint and use tools from prior work as our synthesizers.
We demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed approach by syn-
thesizing programs in three different domains: arithmetic, sorting,
and dynamic programming. Using veriﬁcation tools that we previ-
ously built in the VS3 project we are able to synthesize programs
for complicated arithmetic algorithms including Strassen’s matrix
multiplication and Bresenham’s line drawing; several sorting algo-
rithms; and several dynamic programming algorithms. For these
programs, the median time for synthesis is 14 seconds, and the ra-
tio of synthesis to veriﬁcation time ranges between 1× to 92× (with
an median of 7×), illustrating the potential of the approach.

I.2.2 [Automatic Program-
Categories and Subject Descriptors
ming]: Program Synthesis; F.3.1 [Logics and Meanings of Pro-
grams]: Specifying and Verifying and Reasoning about Programs

General Terms Languages, Theory.

Keywords Proof-theoretic program synthesis, veriﬁcation.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
POPL’10,
January 17–23, 2010, Madrid, Spain.
Copyright c(cid:13) 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-479-9/10/01. . . $10.00

Introduction

1.
Automated program synthesis, despite holding the promise of sig-
niﬁcantly easing the task of programming, has received little atten-
tion due to its difﬁculty. Being able to mechanically construct pro-
grams has wide-ranging implications. Mechanical synthesis yields
programs that are correct-by-construction. It relieves the tedium
and error associated with programming low-level details, can aid in
automated debugging and in general leaves the human programmer
free to deal with the high-level design of the system. Additionally,
synthesis could discover new non-trivial programs that are difﬁcult
for programmers to build.

In this paper, we present an approach to program synthesis
that takes the correct-by-construction philosophy of program de-
sign [14, 18, 38] and shows how it can be automated. Program ver-
iﬁcation tools routinely synthesize program proofs in the form of
inductive invariants for partial correctness and ranking functions
for termination. We encode the synthesis problem as a veriﬁca-
tion problem by encoding program guards and statements as logical
facts that need to be discovered. This allows us to use certain veriﬁ-
cation tools for synthesis. The veriﬁcation tool infers the invariants
and ranking functions as usual, but in addition infers the program
statements, yielding automated program synthesis. We call our ap-
proach proof-theoretic synthesis because the proof is synthesized
alongside the program.

We deﬁne the synthesis task as requirements on the output pro-
gram: functional requirements, requirements on the form of pro-
gram expressions and guards, and requirements on the resources
used. The key to our synthesis algorithm is the reduction from the
synthesis task to three sets of constraints. The ﬁrst set are safety
conditions that ensure the partial correctness of the loops in the pro-
gram. The second set are well-formedness conditions on the pro-
gram guards and statements, such that the output from the veriﬁca-
tion tool (facts corresponding to program guards and statements)
correspond to valid guards and statements in an imperative lan-
guage. The third set are progress conditions that ensure that the
program terminates. To our knowledge, our approach is the ﬁrst
that automatically synthesizes programs and their proofs, while
previous approaches have either used given proofs to extract pro-
grams [27] or made no attempt to generate the proof. Some ap-
proaches, while not generating proofs, do ensure correctness for a
limited class of ﬁnitizable programs [29].

To illustrate our approach, we next show how to synthesize
Bresenham’s line drawing algorithm. This example is an ideal
candidate for automated synthesis because, while the program’s
requirements are simple to specify, the actual program is quite
involved.

1.1 Motivating Example

As a motivating example, we consider a well-known algorithm
from the graphics community called Bresenham’s line drawing
algorithm, shown in Figure 1(a). The algorithm computes (and

(a) Bresenhams(int X, Y ) {

v1:=2Y −X; y:=0; x:=0;
while (x ≤ X)
out[x]:=y;
if (v1 < 0)

v1:=v1+2Y ;

else

v1:=v1+2(Y -X); y++;

x++;

return out;

}

(b) Bresenhams(int X, Y ) {

[]true → v0
while (x ≤ X)

1=2Y −X ∧ y0=0 ∧ x0=0

[]v1 < 0 → out0=upd(out,x,y) ∧ v0
[]v1 ≥ 0 → out0=upd(out,x,y) ∧ v0

1=v1+2Y ∧ y0=y ∧ x0=x+1
1=v1+2(Y -X) ∧ y0=y+1 ∧ x0=x+1

return out;

}

Invariant τ :

(c)

0 < Y ≤ X ∧ v1 = 2(x+1)Y −(2y+1)X ∧
2(Y −X) ≤ v1 ≤ 2Y ∧
∀k : 0 ≤ k < x ⇒ 2|out[k]−(Y /X)k| ≤ 1

Ranking function ϕ : X − x

Figure 1. (a) Bresenham’s line drawing algorithm (b) The invariant and ranking function that prove partial correctness and termination,
respectively. (c) The algorithm written in transition system form, with statements as equality predicates, guarded appropriately.

writes to the output array out) the discrete best-ﬁt line from (0, 0)
to (X, Y ), where the point (X, Y ) is in the NE half-quadrant, i.e.,
0 < Y ≤ X. The best-ﬁt line is one that does not deviate more
than half a pixel away from the real line, i.e., |y − (Y /X)x| ≤ 1/2.
For efﬁciency, the algorithm computes the pixel values (x, y) of
this best-ﬁt line using only linear operations, but the computation is
non-trivial and the correctness of the algorithm is also not evident.
The speciﬁcation for this program is succinctly written in terms

of its precondition τpre and postcondition τpost:

τpre :
τpost : ∀k : 0 ≤ k ≤ X ⇒ 2|out[k]−(Y /X)k| ≤ 1

0 < Y ≤ X

Notice that in the postcondition, we have written the assertion out-
side the loop body for clarity of presentation, but it can easily
be rewritten, as a quantiﬁer-free assertion, inside. Bresenham pro-
posed the program shown in Figure 1(a) to implement this speciﬁ-
cation. The question we answer is whether it is possible to synthe-
size the program given just the speciﬁcation and a description of
the available resources (control ﬂow, stack space and operations).
Let us stepwise develop the idea behind synthesis starting from the
veriﬁcation problem for the given program.

Observe that we can write program statements as equality pred-
icates and acyclic fragments as transition systems. For example, we
can write x := e as x0 = e, where x0 is a renaming of x to its out-
put value. We will write statements as equalities between the output
(primed) versions of the variables and the expression (over the un-
primed versions of the variables). Also, guards that direct control
ﬂow in an imperative program can now be seen as guards for state-
ment facts in a transition system. Figure 1(b) shows our example
written in transition system form. To prove partial correctness, one
can write down the inductive invariant for the loop and verify that
the veriﬁcation condition for the program is in fact valid. The ver-
iﬁcation condition consists of four implications for the four paths
corresponding to the entry, exit, and one each for the branches in
the loop. Using standard veriﬁcation condition generation, with the
precondition τpre and postcondition τpost, and writing the renamed
version of invariant τ as τ 0, these are

τpre ∧ sentry ⇒ τ 0

τ ∧ ¬gloop ⇒ τpost

τ ∧ gloop ∧ gbody1 ∧ sbody1 ⇒ τ 0
τ ∧ gloop ∧ gbody2 ∧ sbody2 ⇒ τ 0

(1)

where we use symbols for the various parts of the program:

gbody1 : v1 < 0
gbody2 : v1 ≥ 0
gloop : x ≤ X
sentry : v0
1=2Y -X ∧ y0=0 ∧ x0=0
sbody1 : out0=upd(out, x, y) ∧ v0
sbody2 : out0=upd(out, x, y) ∧ v0

1=v1+2Y ∧ y0=y ∧ x0=x+1
1=v1+2(Y -X) ∧ y0=y+1 ∧ x0=x+1
With a little bit of work, one can validate that the invariant τ shown
in Figure 1(c) satisﬁes Eq. (1). Checking the validity of given in-

variants can be automated using SMT solvers [10]. In fact, pow-
erful program veriﬁcation tools now exist that can generate ﬁxed-
point solutions—inductive invariants such as τ —automatically us-
ing constraint-based techniques [6, 21, 32], abstract interpreta-
tion [9] or model checking [3]. There are also tools that can prove
termination [7]—by inferring ranking functions such as ϕ—and to-
gether with the safety proof provide a proof for total correctness.

The insight behind our paper is to ask the question, if we can
infer τ in Eq. (1), then is it possible to infer the guards gi’s and the
statements si’s at the same time? We have found that we can in-
deed infer guards and statements as well, by suitably encoding pro-
grams as transition systems, asserting appropriate constraints, and
then leveraging program veriﬁcation techniques to do a systematic
(lattice-theoretic) search for unknowns in the constraints. Here the
unknowns now represent both the invariants and the statements and
guards. It turns out that a direct solution to the unknown guards
and statements may be uninteresting, i.e., it may not correspond
to real programs. But we illustrate that we can impose additional
well-formedness constraints on the unknown guards and statements
such that any solution to this new set of constraints corresponds
to a valid, real program. Additionally, even if we synthesize valid
programs, it may be that the programs are non-terminating. There-
fore we need to impose additional progress constraints that ensure
that the synthesized programs are ones that we can actually run.
We now illustrate the need for these well-formedness and progress
constraints over our example.

Suppose that the statements sentry, sbody1 and sbody2, are un-
known. A trivial satisfying solution to Eq. (1) may set all these
unknowns to false. If we use a typical program veriﬁcation tool
that computes least ﬁxed-points starting from ⊥, then indeed, it will
output this solution. On the other hand, let us make the conditional
guards gbody1 and gbody2 unknown. Again, gbody1 = gbody2 = false
is a satisfying solution. We get uninteresting solutions because the
unknowns are not constrained enough to ensure valid statements
and control-ﬂow. Statement blocks are modeled as V
i x0
i = ei,
with one equality for each output variable x0
i and expressions ei
are over input variables. Therefore, false does not correspond to
any valid block. Similarly gbody1 = gbody2 = false does not cor-
respond to any valid conditional with two branches. For example,
consider if (g) S1 else S2 with two branches. Note how S1 and
S2 are guarded by g and ¬g, respectively, and g ∨ ¬g holds. For
every valid conditional, the disjunction of the guards is always a
tautology. In veriﬁcation, the program syntax and semantics en-
sure the well-formedness of acyclic fragments. In synthesis, we will
need to explicitly constrain well-formedness of acyclic fragments
(Section 3.4).

Next, suppose that the loop guard gloop is unknown. In this case
if we attempt to solve for the unknowns τ and gloop, then one
valid solution assigns τ = gloop = true, which corresponds to
an non-terminating loop. In veriﬁcation, we were only concerned

with partial correctness and assumed that the program was termi-
nating. In synthesis, we will need to explicitly encode progress by
inferring appropriate ranking functions, like ϕ in Figure 1(c), to
prevent the synthesizer from generating non-terminating programs
(Section 3.5).

Note that our aim is not to solve the completely general synthe-
sis problem for a given functional speciﬁcation. Guards and state-
ments are unknowns but they take values from given domains, spec-
iﬁed by the user as domain constraints, so that a lattice-theoretic
search can be performed by existing program veriﬁcation tools.
Also notice that we did not attempt to change the number of invari-
ants or the invariant position in the constraints. This means that we
assume a given looping or ﬂowgraph structure, e.g., one loop for
our example. Lastly, as opposed to veriﬁcation, the set of program
variables is not known, and therefore we need a speciﬁcation of the
stack space available and also a bound on the type of computations
allowed.

We use the speciﬁcations to construct an expansion that is a pro-
gram with unknown symbols and construct safety conditions over
the unknowns. We then impose the additional well-formedness and
progress constraints. We call the new constraints synthesis condi-
tions and hope to ﬁnd solutions to them using program veriﬁcation
tools. The constraints generated are non-standard, and therefore to
solve them we need veriﬁcation tools that satisfy certain properties.
Veriﬁcation tools we developed in previous work [32, 21] indeed
have those properties. We use them to efﬁciently solve the syn-
thesis conditions to synthesize programs, with a very acceptable
slowdown over veriﬁcation.

The guards, statements and proof terms for the example in
this section come from the domain of arithmetic. Therefore, a
program veriﬁcation tool for arithmetic would be appropriate. For
programs whose guards and statements are more easily expressed
in other domains, a corresponding veriﬁcation tool for that domain
should be used. In fact, we have employed tools for the domains of
arithmetic and predicate abstraction for proof-theoretic synthesis
with great success. Our objective is to reuse existing veriﬁcation
technology—that started with invariant validation and progressed
to invariant inference—and push it further to program synthesis.

1.2 Contributions

This paper makes the following contributions:

• We present a novel way of specifying a synthesis task as a
triple consisting of the functional speciﬁcation, the domains of
expressions and guards that appear in the synthesized program,
and resource constraints that the program is allowed to use
(Section 2).

• We view program synthesis as generalized program veriﬁca-
tion. We formally deﬁne constraints, called synthesis condi-
tions, that can be solved using veriﬁcation tools (Section 3).

• We present requirements that program veriﬁcation tools must
meet in order to be used for synthesis of program statements
and guards (Section 4).

• We build synthesizers using veriﬁcation tools and present syn-
thesis results for the three domains of arithmetic, sorting and
dynamic programming (Section 5).

2. The Synthesis Scaffold and Task
We now elaborate on the speciﬁcations that a proof-theoretic ap-
proach to synthesis requires and how these also allow the user to
specify the space of interesting programs.

We describe the synthesis problem using a scaffold of the form
hF, D, Ri

The three components are as follows:
1. Functional Speciﬁcation The ﬁrst component F of a scaffold
describes the desired precondition and postcondition of the synthe-
sized program. Let ~vin and ~vout be the vectors containing the input
and output variables, respectively. Then a functional speciﬁcation
F = (Fpre( ~vin), Fpost( ~vin, ~vout)) is a tuple containing the formu-
lae that hold at the entry and exit program locations. For example,
.
for the program in Figure 1, Fpre(X, Y )
= (0 < Y ≤ X and
.
Fpost(X, Y, out)
= ∀k : 0 ≤ k ≤ X ⇒ 2(Y /X)k − 1 ≤
2out[k] ≤ 2(Y /X)k + 1.
2. Domain Constraints The second component D of the scaffold
describes the domains for expressions and guards in the synthesized
program. The domain speciﬁcation D = (Dexp, Dgrd) is a tuple that
constrains the respective components:

2a. Program Expressions: The expressions manipulated by the pro-

gram come from the domain Dexp.

2b. Program Guards: The logical guards (boolean expressions)
used to direct control ﬂow in the program come from the do-
main Dgrd.

For example, for the program in Figure 1, the domains Dexp, Dgrd
are both linear arithmetic.
3. Resource Constraints The third component R of the scaffold
describes the resources that the synthesized program can use. The
resource speciﬁcation R = (Rflow, Rstack, Rcomp) is a triple of
resource templates that the user must specify for the ﬂowgraph,
stack and computation, respectively:

3a. Flowgraph Template We restrict attention to structured pro-
grams (those that are goto-less, or whose ﬂowgraphs are re-
ducible [22]). The structured nature of such ﬂowgraphs allows
us to describe them using simple strings. The user speciﬁes a
string Rflow from the following grammar:

T ::= ◦ | ∗(T )

| T ;T

(2)

where ◦ denotes an acyclic fragment of the ﬂow graph, ∗(T )
denotes a loop containing the body T and T ;T denotes the
sequential composition of two ﬂow graphs. For example, for
the program in Figure 1, Rflow = ◦;∗(◦).

3b. Stack Template A map Rstack : type → int indicating the
number of extra temporary variables of each type available
to the program. For example, for the program in Figure 1,
Rstack = (int, 1).

3c. Computation Template At times it may be important to put an
upper bound on the number of times an operation is performed
inside a procedure. A map Rcomp : op → int of operations op
to the upper bound speciﬁes this constraint. For example, for
the program in Figure 1, Rcomp = ∅ which indicates that there
are no constraints on computation.

On the one hand, the resource templates make synthesis tractable
by enabling a systematic lattice-theoretic search, while on the other
they allow the user to specify the space of interesting programs and
can be used as a feature. For instance, the user may wish to reduce
memory consumption at the expense of a more complex ﬂowgraph
and still meet the functional speciﬁcation. If the user does not care,
then the resource templates can be considered optional and left
unspeciﬁed. In this case, the synthesizer can iteratively enumerate
possibilities for each resource and attempt synthesis with increas-
ing resources.

2.1 Picking a proof domain and a solver for the domain

Our synthesis approach is proof-theoretic and we synthesize the
proof terms, i.e., invariants and ranking functions, alongside the

program. These proof terms will take values from a suitably chosen
proof domain Dprf. Notice that Dprf will be at least as expressive
as Dgrd and Dexp. The user chooses an appropriate proof domain
and also picks a solver capable of handling that domain. We will
use program veriﬁcation tools as solvers and typically, the user will
pick the most powerful veriﬁcation tool available for the chosen
proof domain.

2.2 Synthesis Task
Given a scaffold hF, D, Ri, we call an executable program valid
with respect to the scaffold if it meets the following conditions.

• When called with inputs ~vin that satisfy Fpre( ~vin) the program
terminates, and the resulting outputs ~vout satisfy Fpost( ~vin, ~vout).
There are associated invariants and ranking functions that pro-
vide a proof of this fact.

• There is a program loop (with an associated loop guard g)
corresponding to each loop annotation (speciﬁed by “∗”) in
the ﬂowgraph template Rflow. The program contains statements
from the following imperative language IML for each acyclic
fragment (speciﬁed by “◦”).

S ::= skip | S;S | x := e | if g then S else S

Where x denotes a variable, e denotes some expression, and g
denotes some predicate. (Memory reads and writes are modeled
using memory variables and select/update expressions.) The
domain of expressions and guards is as speciﬁed by the scaffold,
i.e., e ∈ Dexp and g ∈ Dgrd.

• The program only uses as many local variables as speciﬁed by
Rstack in addition to the input and output variables ~vin, ~vout.
• Each elementary operation only appears as many times as spec-

iﬁed in Rcomp.

√

EXAMPLE 1 (Square Root). Let us consider a scaffold with func-
tional speciﬁcation F = (x ≥ 1, (i − 1)2 ≤ x < i2), which states
that the program computes the integral square root of the input x
, i.e., i − 1 = b
xc. Also, let the domain constraints Dexp, Dgrd
be limited to linear arithmetic expressions, which means that the
program cannot use any native square root or squaring operations.
Lastly, let the Rflow, Rstack and Rcomp be ◦;∗(◦);◦, {(int, 1)} and
∅, respectively. A program that is valid with respect to this scaffold
is the following:

IntSqrt(int x) {

v:=1;i:=1;
whileτ,ϕ(v ≤ x)
v:=v+2i+1;i++;

return i−1;

}

Invariant τ :

v=i2 ∧x ≥ (i−1)2 ∧i ≥ 1

Ranking function ϕ:

x − (i−1)2

where v, i are the additional stack variable and loop iteration
counter (and reused in the output), respectively. Also, the loop
is annotated with the invariant τ and ranking function ϕ as shown,
and which prove partial correctness and termination, respectively.

In the next two sections, we formally describe the steps of
our synthesis algorithm. We ﬁrst generate synthesis conditions
(Section 3), which are constraints over unknowns for statements,
guards, loop invariants and ranking functions. We then observe that
they resemble veriﬁcation conditions, and we can employ veriﬁca-
tion tools, if they have certain properties, to solve them (Section 4).

3. Synthesis Conditions
In this section, we deﬁne and construct synthesis conditions for
an input scaffold hF, D, Ri. Using the resource speciﬁcation R,
we ﬁrst generate a program with unknowns corresponding to the
fragments we wish to synthesize. Synthesis conditions then specify

constraints on these unknowns and ensure partial correctness, loop
termination and well-formedness of control-ﬂow. We begin our
discussion by motivating the representation we use for acyclic
fragments in the synthesized program.

3.1 Using Transition Systems to Represent Acyclic Code

Suppose we want to infer a set of (straight-line) statements that
transform a precondition φpre to a postcondition φpost, where the
relevant program variables are x and y. One approach might be to
generate statements that assign unknown expressions ex and ey to
x and y, respectively:

{φpre}x := ex; y := ey{φpost}

Then we can use Hoare’s axiom for assignment to generate the
veriﬁcation condition φpre ⇒ (φpost[y 7→ ey])[x 7→ ex]. However,
this veriﬁcation condition is hard to automatically reason about
because it contains substitution into unknowns. Even worse, we
have restricted the search space by requiring the assignment to
y to follow the assignment to x, and by specifying exactly two
assignments.

Instead we will represent the computation as a transition system
which provides a much cleaner mechanism for reasoning when pro-
gram statements are unknown. A transition in a transition system
is a (possibly parallel) mapping of the input variables to the output
variables. Variables have an input version and an output version (in-
dicated by primed names), which allows them to change state. For
our example, we can write a single transition:
{φpre} ˙x0, y0¸ = hex, eyi {φ0

post}

Here φ0
post is the postcondition, written in terms of the output
variables, and ex, ey are expressions over the input variables. The
veriﬁcation condition corresponding to this tuple is φpre ∧ x0 =
ex ∧ y0 = ey ⇒ φ0
post. Note that every state update (assignment)
can always be written as a transition.

We can extend this approach to arbitrary acyclic program frag-
ments. A guarded transition (written []g → s) contains a state-
ment s that is executed only if the quantiﬁer-free guard g holds. A
transition system consists of a set {[]gi → si}i of guarded transi-
tions. It is easy to see that a transition system can represent any
arbitrary acyclic program fragment by suitably enumerating the
paths through the acyclic fragment. The veriﬁcation condition for
{φpre}{[]gi → si}i{φ0
post).
In addition to the simplicity afforded by the lack of any order-
ing, the constraints from transition systems are attractive for syn-
thesis as the program statements si and guards gi are facts just
like the pre- and postconditions φpre and φ0
post. Given the lack of
differentiation, any (or all) can be unknowns in these synthesis con-
ditions. This distinguishes them from veriﬁcation conditions which
can only have unknown invariants, or often the invariants must be
known as well.

i(φpre ∧ gi ∧ si ⇒ φ0

post} is simply V

Synthesis conditions can thus be viewed as generalizations of
veriﬁcation conditions. Program veriﬁcation tools routinely infer
ﬁxed-point solutions (invariants) that satisfy the veriﬁcation condi-
tions with known statements and guards. With our formulation of
statements and guards as just additional facts in the constraints, it
is possible to use (sufﬁciently general) veriﬁcation tools to infer in-
variants and program statements and guards. Synthesis conditions
serve an analogous purpose to synthesis as veriﬁcation conditions
do to veriﬁcation. If a program is correct (veriﬁable), then its veri-
ﬁcation condition is valid. Similarly, if a valid program exists for a
scaffold, then its synthesis condition has a satisfying solution.

3.2 Expanding a ﬂowgraph

We synthesize code fragments for each acyclic fragment and loop
annotation in the ﬂowgraph template as follows:

• Acyclic fragments: For each acyclic fragment annotation “◦”,
we infer a transition system {gi → si}i, i.e., a set of assign-
ments si, stated as conjunctions of equality predicates, guarded
by quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order-logic (FOL) guards gi such that the
disjunction of the guards is a tautology. Suitably constructed
equality predicates and quantiﬁer-free FOL guards are later
translated to executable code—assignment statements and con-
ditional guards, respectively—in the language IML.

• Loops: For each loop annotation “∗” we infer three elements.
The ﬁrst is the inductive loop invariant τ , which establishes
partial correctness of each loop iteration. The second is the
ranking function ϕ, which proves the termination of the loop.
Both the invariant and ranking function take values from the
proof domain, i.e., τ, ϕ ∈ Dprf. Third, we infer a quantiﬁer-
free FOL loop guard g.

Formally, the output of expanding ﬂowgraphs will be a program
in the transition system language TSL (note the correspondence to
the ﬂowgraph grammar from Eq. 2):

p ::= choose {[]gi → si}i

| whileτ,ϕ(g) do {p} | p;p

Here each si is a conjunction of equality predicates, i.e., V
j (xj =
ej). We will use ~p to denote a sequence of program statements
in TSL. Note that we model memory read and updates using se-
lect/update predicates. Therefore, in x = e the variable x could
be a memory variable and e could be a memory select or update
expression.

Given a string for a ﬂowgraph template, we deﬁne an expan-
sion function Expand : int ×Dprf ×R ×D ×Rflow → TSL that
introduces fresh unknowns for missing guards, statements and in-
n,Dprf
D,R (Rflow) expands a
variants that are to be synthesized. Expand
ﬂowgraph Rflow and is parametrized by an integer n that indicates
the number of transition each acyclic fragment will be expanded
to, the proof domain and the resource and domain constraints. The
expansion outputs a program in the language TSL.

Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (◦) = choose {[]gi → si}i=1..n

Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (∗(T )) = whileτ,ϕ (g) {

Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (T );

}

gi, si : fresh
unknowns
τ, ϕ, g : fresh
unknowns

Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (T1;T2) = Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (T1);Expand

n,Dprf
D,R (T2)

Each unknown g, s, τ generated during the expansion has the fol-
lowing domain inclusion constraints.

τ ∈ Dprf|V
g ∈ Dgrd|V
s ∈ V

i xi = ei where xi ∈ V, ei ∈ Dexp|V

Here V = ~vin ∪ ~vout ∪ T ∪ L is the set of variables: the input ~vin
and output ~vout variables, the set of temporaries (local variables) T
as speciﬁed by Rstack, and the set of iteration counters and ranking
function tracker variables is L (which we elaborate on later), one
for each loop in the expansion. The restriction of the domains by
the variable set V indicates that we are interested in the fragment
of the domain over the variables in V . Also, the set of operations in
ei is bounded by Rcomp.

The expansion has some similarities to the notion of a user-
speciﬁed sketch in previous approaches [31, 29]. However, the un-
knowns in the expansion here are more expressive than the integer
unknowns considered earlier, and this allows us to perform a lattice
search as opposed to the combinatorial approaches proposed ear-
lier. Notice that the unknowns τ, g, s, ϕ we introduce can all be in-
terpreted as boolean formulae (τ, g naturally; s using our transition

modeling; and ϕ as ϕ > c, for some constant c), and consequently
ordered in a lattice.

EXAMPLE 2. Let us revisit the integral square root computation
from Example 1. Expanding the ﬂowgraph template ◦;∗(◦);◦ with
n = 1 yields expsqrt:

choose {[]g1 → s1} ;
whileτ,ϕ (g0) {

choose {[]g2 → s2} ;

};
choose {[]g3 → s3}

τ ∈ Dprf|V
g1, g2, g3 ∈ Dgrd|V
s1, s2, s3 ∈ V

i xi = ei
xi ∈ V, ei ∈ Dexp|V

where V = {x, i, r, v}. The variables i and r are the loop iteration
counter and ranking function tracker variable, respectively, and
v is the additional local variable. Also, the chosen domains for
proofs Dprf, guards Dgrd and expressions Dexp are FOL facts over
quadratic expressions, FOL facts over linear arithmetic and linear
arithmetic, respectively.

Notice that the expansion encodes everything speciﬁed by the do-
main and resource constraints and the chosen proof domain. The
only remaining speciﬁcation is F, which we will use in the next
section to construct safety conditions over the expanded scaffold.

3.3 Encoding Partial Correctness: Safety Conditions

Now that we have the expanded scaffold we need to collect the
constraints (safety conditions) for partial correctness implied by the
simple paths in the expansion. Simple paths (straight-line sequence
of statements) start at a loop header Fpre and end at a loop header
or program exit. The loop headers, program entry and program exit
are annotated with invariants, precondition Fpre and postcondition
Fpost, respectively.

Let φ denote formulae, that represent pre and postconditions
and constraints. Then we deﬁne PathC : φ × TSL × φ → φ
as a function that takes a precondition, a sequence of statements
and a postcondition and outputs safety constraints that encode the
validity of the Hoare triple. Let us ﬁrst describe the simple cases of
constraints from a single acyclic fragment and loop:

PathC(φpre, (choose {[]gi → si}i ), φpost) =

V

i(φpre ∧ gi ∧ si ⇒ φpost

0)

PathC(φpre, (whileτ,ϕ (g) {~pl}), φpost) =

φpre ⇒ τ 0 ∧ PathC(τ ∧ g, ~pl, τ ) ∧ (τ ∧ ¬g ⇒ φpost

0)

0 and τ 0 are the postcondition φpost and invariant τ but
Here φpost
with all variables renamed to their output (primed) versions. Since
the constraints need to refer to output postconditions and invariants
the rule for a sequence of statements is a bit complicated. For sim-
plicity of presentation, we assume that acyclic annotations do not
appear in succession. This assumption holds without loss of gener-
ality because it is always possible to collapse consecutive acyclic
fragments, e.g., two consecutive acyclic fragments with n transi-
tions each can be collapsed into a single acyclic fragment with n2
transitions. For efﬁciency, it is prudent to not make this assumption
in practice, and the construction here generalizes easily. For a se-
quence of statements in TSL, under the above assumptions, there
are three cases to consider. First, a loop followed by statements
~p. Second, an acyclic fragment followed by just a loop. Third, an
acyclic fragment, followed by a loop, followed by statements ~p.
Each of these generates the following, respective, constraints:
PathC(φpre, (whileτ,ϕ (g) {~pl};~p), φpost) =

(φpre ⇒ τ 0) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ g, ~pl, τ ) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ ¬g, ~p, φpost)
PathC(φpre, (choose {[]gi → si}i ;whileτ,ϕ (g) {~pl}), φpost) =

V

V

i(φpre ∧ gi ∧ si ⇒ τ 0) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ g, ~pl, τ ) ∧ (τ ∧ ¬g ⇒ φpost

PathC(φpre, (choose {[]gi → si}i ;whileτ,ϕ (g) {~pl};~p), φpost) =

0)

i(φpre ∧ gi ∧ si ⇒ τ 0) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ g, ~pl, τ ) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ ¬g, ~p, φpost)

The safety condition for a scaffold with functional speciﬁca-
tion F = (Fpre, Fpost), ﬂowgraph template Rflow, and expansion
exp = Expand

(Rflow) is given by:

D,R
n,Dprf

SafetyCond(exp, F) = PathC(Fpre, exp, Fpost)

(3)

EXAMPLE 3. Consider the expanded scaffold (from Example 2)
and the functional speciﬁcation F (from Example 1) for integral
square root. The loop divides the program into three simple paths,
which results in SafetyCond(expsqrt, F):

x ≥ 1 ∧ g1 ∧ s1 ⇒ τ 0
τ ∧ g0 ∧ g2 ∧ s2 ⇒ τ 0

τ ∧ ¬g0 ∧ g3 ∧ s3 ⇒ (i0 − 1)2 ≤ x0 ∧ x0 < i02

∧
∧

Notice that gi, si, τ are all unknown placeholder symbols.

3.4 Encoding Valid Control: Well-formedness Conditions

We next construct constraints to ensure the well-formedness of
choose statements. In the preceding development, we treated each
path through the choose statement as independent. In any ex-
ecutable program control will always ﬂow through at least one
branch/transition of the statement, and each transition will contain
well-formed assignment statements. We ﬁrst describe a constraint
that encodes this directly and then discuss an alternative way of
ensuring well-formedness of transition guards.

Non-iterative upper bounded search During the expansion of
a scaffold, we can choose n to be greater than the number of
transitions expected in any acyclic fragment. Any excess transi-
tions will have their guards instantiated to false. For any state-
ment choose {[]gi → si} in the expansion, we impose the well-
formedness constraint:
WellFormTS({[]gi → si}i)

.
=`V

i valid(si)´ Valid transition
Covers space

´

∧ `W

(4)

i gi

Here the predicate valid(si) ensures one and only one equality
assignment to each variable in si. This condition ensures that each
si corresponds to a well-formed transition that can be translated to
executable statements. The second term constrains the combination
of the guards to be a tautology. Note that this is important to ensure
that each transition system is well-formed and can be converted to a
valid executable conditional. For example, consider the executable
conditional if (G) then x := E1 else x := E2. The correspond-
ing transition system is {[]g1 → (x0 = E1), []g2 → (x0 = E2)},
where g1 = G and g2 = ¬G and g1 ∨ g2 holds. In every well-
formed executable conditional the disjunction of the guards will be
a tautology. The second term imposes this constraint.

Notice that this construction does not constrain the guards to
be disjoint (mutually exclusive). Disjointedness is not required
for correctness [11] because if multiple guards are triggered then
arbitrarily choosing the body for any one sufﬁces. Therefore,
without loss of generality, the branches can be arbitrarily ordered
(thus ensuring mutual exclusivity) in the output to get a valid
imperative program.

Iterative lower bounded search Notice that Eq. (4) is non-
standard, i.e., it is not an implication constraint like typical ver-
iﬁcation conditions, and we will elaborate on this in Section 4.
For the case when a program veriﬁcation tool is unable to handle
such non-standard constraints, we need a technique for ensuring
well-formedness of transitions without asserting Eq. (4).

We ﬁrst assume that valid(si) holds, and we will show in
Section 4.3 the conditions under which it does. Then all we need
to ensure well-formedness is that ∨igi is a tautology. Since the
transitions of a choose statement represent independent execution
paths, we can perform an iterative search for the guards gi. We start

by ﬁnding any satisfying guard (and corresponding transition)—
which can even be false. We then iteratively ask for another guard
(and transition) such that the space deﬁned by the new guard is not
entirely contained in the space deﬁned by the disjunction of the
guards already generated. If we ensure that at each step the newly
discovered guard covers some more space that was not covered
by earlier guards, then eventually the disjunction of all will be a
tautology.

More formally, suppose n such calls result in the transition
system {[]gi → si}i=1..n, and ∨i=1..ngi is not already a tautology.
Then for the n + 1st transition, we assert the constraint ¬(gn+1 ⇒
(∨i=1..ngi)). This constraint ensures that gn+1 will cover some
space not covered by ∨i=1..ngi. We repeat until ∨igi holds. This
iterative search for the transitions also eliminates the need to guess
the value of n.

Well-formedness of an Expanded Scaffold We constrain the
well-formedness of each transition system in the expanded scaf-
fold exp = Expand

(Rflow) using Eq. (4).

D,R
n,Dprf

WellFormCond(exp) =

^

WellFormTS({[]gi → si}i) (5)

choose {[]gi→si}i ∈cond(exp)

where cond(exp) recursively examines the expanded scaffold exp
and returns the set of all choose statements in it.

EXAMPLE 4. For the expanded scaffold in Example 2, since
each acyclic fragment only contains one guarded transition, the
well-formedness constraints are simple and state that each of
g1, g2, g3 = true and valid(s1)∧valid(s2)∧valid(s3) holds.

3.5 Encoding Progress: Ranking functions

Until now our encoding has focused on safety conditions that, by
themselves, only ensure partial correctness but not termination.
Next, we add progress constraints to ensure that the synthesized
programs terminate.

To encode progress for a loop l = whileτ,ϕl (g) do {~p}, we
assert the existence of a ranking function as an unknown (numer-
ical) expression ϕl that is lower bounded and decreases with each
iteration of the loop. Because ϕl is an unknown expression it is dif-
ﬁcult to encode directly that it decreases. Therefore, we introduce a
tracking variable rl, such that rl = ϕl. We use rl to remember the
value of the ranking function at the head of the loop, and because
it is a proof variable no assignments to it can appear in the body
of the loop. On the other hand, ϕl changes due to the loop body,
and at the end of the iteration we can then check if the new value is
strictly less than the old value, i.e., rl > ϕl. Without loss of gen-
erality, we pick a lower bound of 0 for the tracking variable and
conservatively assume that the termination argument is implied by
the loop invariant τ , i.e, τ ⇒ rl ≥ 0.

Now that we have asserted the lower bound, what remains is
to assert that ϕl decreases in each iteration. Assume, for the time
being, that the body does not contain any nested loops. Then we
can capture the effect of the loop body using PathC as deﬁned
earlier, with precondition τ ∧ g and postcondition rl > ϕ. Then,
the progress constraint for loop l without any inner loop is:

prog(l)

.
= (rl = ϕl ∧ (τ ⇒ rl ≥ 0) ∧ PathC(τ ∧ g, ~p, rl > ϕl))

Using the above deﬁnition of progress we deﬁne the progress

constraint for the entire expanded scaffold exp = Expand

D,R
n,Dprf

(Rflow):

RankCond(exp) =

^

prog(l)

(6)

l∈loops(exp)

where loops(exp) recursively examines the expanded scaffold
exp and returns the set of all loops in it.

EXAMPLE 5. In the expanded scaffold of Example 2 there is only
one loop, whose ranking function we denote by ϕl and with tracker
rl. Then we generate the following progress constraint:
rl = ϕl ∧ (τ ⇒ rl ≥ 0) ∧ (τ ∧ g0 ∧ g2 ∧ s2 ⇒ r0

l > ϕ0
l)

To relax the assumption we made earlier about no nesting of
loops, we need a simple modiﬁcation to the progress constraint
prog(l). Instead of considering the effect of the entire body ~p
(which now contains inner loops), we instead consider the fragment
end(l) after the last inner loop in ~p. Also, let τend denote the
invariant for the last inner loop. Then, the progress constraint for
loop l is:

prog(l)

.
= rl = ϕl ∧ (τ ⇒ rl ≥ 0) ∧ PathC(τend, end(l), rl > ϕl)

Notice that because the loop invariants are not decided a priori, i.e.,
we are not doing program extraction, we may assert that the invari-
ants should be strong enough to satisfy the progress constraints.
Speciﬁcally, we have imposed the requirement that the intermedi-
ate loop invariants carry enough information such that it sufﬁces to
consider only the last loop invariant τend in the assertion.

3.6 Entire Synthesis Condition

D,R
n,Dprf

Finally, we combine the constraints from the preceding sections to
yield the entire synthesis condition for an expanded scaffold exp =
(Rflow). The constraint SafetyCond(exp, F) (Eq. 3)
Expand
ensures partial correctness of the program with respect to the func-
tional speciﬁcation. The constraint WellFormCond(exp) (Eq. 5)
restricts the space to programs with valid control-ﬂow. The con-
straint RankCond(exp) (Eq. 6) restricts the space to terminating
programs. The entire synthesis condition is given by
sc = SafetyCond(exp, F)∧WellFormCond(exp)∧RankCond(exp)

Notice that we have omitted the implicit quantiﬁers for the sake
of clarity. The actual form is ∃U ∀V : sc. The set V denotes
the program variables, ~vin ∪ ~vout ∪ T ∪ L where T is the set of
temporaries (additional local variables) as speciﬁed by the scaffold
and L is the set of iteration counters and ranking function trackers.
Also, U is the set of all unknowns of various types instantiated
during the expansion of scaffold. This includes unknowns for the
invariants τ , the guards g and the statements s.

EXAMPLE 6. Accumulating the partial correctness, well-formedness
of branching and progress constraints we get the following synthe-
sis condition (where we have removed the trivial guards g1, g2, g3
as discussed in Example 4):

x ≥ 1 ∧ s1 ⇒ τ 0
τ ∧ g0 ∧ s2 ⇒ τ 0

∧
∧
τ ∧ ¬g0 ∧ s3 ⇒ (i0 − 1)2 ≤ x0 ∧ x0 < i02 ∧
∧
valid(s1) ∧ valid(s2) ∧ valid(s3)
l > ϕ0
rl = ϕl ∧ (τ ⇒ rl ≥ 0) ∧ (τ ∧ g0 ∧ s2 ⇒ r0
l)

Here is a valid solution to the above constraints:

v = i2 ∧ x ≥ (i − 1)2 ∧ i ≥ 1
τ :
g0 :
v ≤ x
ϕl : x − (i − 1)2
s1 :
s2 :
s3 :

v0 = 1 ∧ i0 = 1 ∧ x0 = x ∧ r0
v0 = v + 2i + 1 ∧ i0 = i + 1 ∧ x0 = x ∧ r0
v0 = v ∧ i0 = i ∧ x0 = x ∧ r0

l = rl

l = rl

l = rl

(7)

Notice how each of the unknowns satisfy their domain constraints,
i.e., τ is from FOL over quadratic relations, ϕl is a quadratic
expression, s1, s2, s2 are conjunctions of linear equalities and g0 is
from quantiﬁer-free FOL over linear relations. In the next section
we show how such solutions can be computed using existing tools.

Input: Scaffold hF, D, Ri, maximum transitions n,

proof domain Dprf

Output: Executable program or FAIL
begin

n,Dprf
exp := Expand
D,R (Rflow);
sc := SafetyCond(exp, F) ∧
WellFormCond(exp) ∧
RankCond(exp);

π := Solver(sc);

if (unsat(π)) then
return FAIL;
return Exeπ(exp);

end

Algorithm 1: The entire synthesis algorithm.

Under the assumption [13] that every loop with a pre- and post-
condition has an inductive proof of correctness, and every termi-
nating loop has a ranking function, and that the domains chosen are
expressive enough, we can prove that the synthesis conditions, for
the case of non-iterative upper bounded well-formedness, model
the program faithfully:

THEOREM 1 (Soundness and Completeness). The synthesis con-
ditions corresponding to a scaffold are satisﬁable iff there exists a
program (with a maximum of n transitions in each acyclic frag-
ment where n is the parameter to the expansion) that is valid with
respect to the scaffold.

Additionally, for the alternative approach to discovering guards

(Section 3.4), we can prove soundness and relative completeness:

THEOREM 2 (Soundness and Relative Completeness). (a) Sound-
ness: If there exists a program that is valid with respect to the
scaffold then at each step of the iteration the synthesis conditions
generated are satisﬁable. (b) Relative completeness: If the iterative
search for guards terminates then it ﬁnds a program that is valid
with respect to the scaffold.

4. Solving Synthesis Conditions
In this section we describe how the synthesis conditions for an
expanded scaffold can be solved using ﬁxed-point computation
tools (program veriﬁers).

Suppose we have a procedure Solver(sc) that can generate
solutions to a synthesis condition sc. Algorithm 1 is our synthesis
algorithm, which expands the given scaffold to exp, constructs
synthesis conditions sc, uses Solver(sc) to generate a solution π
to the unknowns that appear in the constraints and ﬁnally generates
concrete programs (whose acyclic fragments are from the language
IML from Section 2) using the postprocessor Exeπ(exp).

The concretization function Exeπ(exp) takes the solution π
computed by Solver(sc) and the expanded scaffold exp, and
outputs a program whose acyclic fragments are from the language
IML. The function deﬁnes a concretization for each statement in
TSL and annotates each loop with its loop invariant and ranking
function:

Exeπ(whileτ,ϕ(g) do {~p}) =

Exeπ(p;~p) = Exeπ(p);Exeπ(~p)

Exeπ(choose {[]g → s}) =

whileπ(τ ),π(ϕ)(π(g)) { Exeπ(~p) }

Exeπ(choose {[]gi → si}i=1..n) =

(where n > 1)

if (π(g)) {Stmt(π(s))} else {skip}

if (π(g1)) {Stmt(π(s1))}
else {Exeπ(choose {[]gi → si}i=2..n)}

where π maps each s to a conjunction of equalities and the con-
cretization function Stmt(s) expands the equality predicates to
their corresponding state updates:

Stmt(

^

xi = ei)

.
=

i=1..n

(t1 := e1; . . ;tn := en);

(x1 := t1; . . ;xn := tn)

The above is a simple translation that uses additional fresh tem-
porary variables t1 . . tn to simulate parallel assignment. Alterna-
tively, one can use data dependency analysis to generate code that
uses fewer temporary variables.

4.1 Basic Requirement for Solver(sc)

Our objective is to use veriﬁcation tools to implement Solver(sc),
but we realize that not all tools are powerful enough. For use as
a solver for synthesis conditions, veriﬁcation tools require certain
properties.

Let us ﬁrst recall [32] the notion of the polarity of unknowns
in a formula. Let φ be a FOL formula with unknowns whose
occurrences are unique. Notice that all the constraints we gen-
erate have unique occurrences as we rename appropriately. We
can categorize unknowns as either positive or negative such that
strengthening (weakening) the positive (negative) unknowns makes
φ stronger. Structurally, the nesting depth under negation—in the
boolean formula written using the basic operators (∨, ∧, ¬, ∃, ∀)—
deﬁnes whether an unknown is positive (even depth) or negative
(odd depth). For example, the formula (a ∨ ¬b) ∧ ¬(¬c ∨ d) has
positive unknowns {a, c} and negative unknowns {b, d}.

In program veriﬁcation we infer loop invariants given veriﬁca-
tion conditions with known program statements. Let us reconsider
the veriﬁcation condition in Eq. (1) with known program statements
and guards. Notice that the constraints can be categorized into three
forms, τ ∧ f1 ⇒ τ 0, τ ∧ f2 ⇒ f3 and f4 ⇒ τ 0, where fi’s de-
note known formulae. Also, observe that these three are the only
forms in which constraints in veriﬁcation conditions can occur.
From these, we can see that the veriﬁcation conditions contain at
most one positive and one negative unknown (using the disjunctive
translation of implication), depending on whether the correspond-
ing path ends or starts at an invariant. Program veriﬁcation tools
implementing typical ﬁxed-point computation algorithms are spe-
cialized to work solely with constraints with one positive and one
negative unknown because there is no need to be more general.

In fact, traditional iterative ﬁxed-point computation is even
more specialized in that it requires support for either just one pos-
itive unknown or just one negative unknown. Traditional veriﬁers
work either in a forward (computing least ﬁxed-point) or back-
wards (computing greatest-ﬁxed point) direction starting with the
approximation ⊥ or >, respectively, and iteratively reﬁning it.

A backwards iterative data ﬂow analyzer always instantiates the
positive unknown to the current approximation and uses the result-
ing constraint (with only one negative unknown) to improve the
approximation. For example, suppose the current approximation to
the invariant τ is f5, then a backwards analyzer may instantiate τ 0
in the constraint τ ∧ f1 ⇒ τ 0 to get the formula τ ∧ f1 ⇒ f 0
5 (with
one negative unknown τ ). It will then use the formula to improve
the approximation by computing a new value for τ that makes this
formula satisﬁable.

Similarly, a typical forwards iterative data ﬂow analyzer in-
stantiates the negative unknown to the current approximation and
uses the resulting constraint (with only one positive unknown) to
improve the approximation. For example, suppose the current ap-
proximation to the invariant τ is f6, then a forwards analyzer may
instantiate τ in the constraint τ ∧ f1 ⇒ τ 0 to get the formula
f6 ∧ f1 ⇒ τ 0 (with one positive unknown τ ). It will then use the
formula to improve the approximation by computing a new value
for τ 0 that makes this formula satisﬁable.

In contrast, let us consider the components (from Section 3)
of the synthesis condition. The component SafetyCond(exp)
(Eq. (3)), in addition to the unknowns due to the invariants τ ,
contains unknowns for the program guards g and program state-
ments s. These unknowns appear exclusively as negative un-
knowns, and there can be multiple such unknowns in each con-
straint. For example, in Eq. (1), the guards and statement unknowns
appear as negative unknowns. On the other hand, the component
WellFormCond(exp) (Eq. (5)) contains the well-formedness con-
dition on the guards ∨igi that is a constraint with multiple positive
unknowns. Therefore we need a veriﬁer that satisﬁes the following.

REQUIREMENT 1. Support for multiple positive and multiple neg-
ative unknowns.

Notice this requirement is more general than that supported by

typical veriﬁers we discussed above.

Now consider, an example safety constraint such as τ ∧ g ∧ s ⇒
τ 0 with unknowns τ , g and s, that can be rewritten as τ ⇒ τ 0 ∨
¬g∨¬s. Also, let us rewrite an example well-formedness constraint
∨gi as true ⇒ ∨gi. This view presents an alternative explanation
for Requirement 1 in that we need a tool that can infer the right
case split, which in most cases would not be unique and would
require maintaining multiple orthogonal solutions. Intuitively, this
is related to a tool’s ability to infer disjunctive facts.

In the above we implicitly assumed the invariant to be a con-
junction of predicates. In the general case, we may wish to infer
more expressive (disjunctive) invariants, e.g., of the form u1 ⇒ u2
or ∀k : u3 ⇒ u4, where ui’s are unknowns. In this case, multi-
ple negative and positive unknowns appear even in the veriﬁcation
condition and therefore the veriﬁcation tool must satisfy Require-
ment 1, which matches the intuition that disjunctive inference is
required.

4.2 Constraint-based Veriﬁers as Solver(sc)

Constraint-based ﬁxed-point computation is a relatively recent ap-
proach to program veriﬁcation that has been successfully used for
difﬁcult analyses [32]. In previous work, we designed efﬁcient
constraint-based veriﬁcation tools for two popular domains, pred-
icate abstraction [32, 20] and linear arithmetic [21]. The tools for
both domains satisfy Requirement 1.

Constraint-based veriﬁcation tools reduce a veriﬁcation condi-
tion vc (with invariant unknowns) to a boolean constraint ψ(vc)
such that a satisfying solution to the boolean constraint corresponds
to valid invariants. The property they ensure is the following:

PROPERTY 1. The boolean constraint ψ(vc) is satisﬁable iff there
exists a ﬁxed-point solution for the unknowns corresponding to the
invariants.

The reduction can also be applied to synthesis condition sc to get
boolean constraints ψ(sc) and a similar property holds. That is, the
boolean constraint ψ(sc) is satisﬁable iff there exist statements,
guards and invariants that satisfy the synthesis condition.

4.3 Iterative Veriﬁers as Solver(sc)

Let us now consider the case where the veriﬁcation tool cannot han-
dle non-standard constraints, such as Eq. (4). This is the case for
typical iterative program veriﬁcation tools that compute increas-
ingly better approximations to invariants. We show that despite this
lack of expressivity it is still possible to solve synthesis conditions
as long as the tool satisﬁes an additional requirement.

The only non-implication constraint in the synthesis condition
sc is WellFormCond(sc). In Section 3.4, we discussed how an it-
erative lower-bounded search can discover the transitions {[]gi →
si}i without asserting Eq. (5). There we had left the question of
ensuring valid(si) unanswered. Consider now the case where a

valid solution gi, si exists (i.e., si is not false or that valid(si)
holds) that satisﬁes the constraint set. As an instance, in Example 6,
we have a synthesis condition for which a valid solution exists as
shown by Eq. (7). Notice that this solution is strictly weaker than
another solution that assigns identical values to other unknowns
but assigns false to any of s2, s2 or s3. In fact, we can observe
that if the tool only generates maximally weak solutions then be-
tween these two solutions (which are comparable as we saw), it
will always pick the one in which it does not assign false to state-
ment unknowns. Therefore, it will always generate si such that
valid(si) holds unless no such si exists. Therefore, if the pro-
gram veriﬁcation tool satisﬁes the following requirement, then we
can omit Eq. (5) from the synthesis condition and still solve it using
the tool.

REQUIREMENT 2. Solutions are maximally weak.

This requirement corresponds to the tool’s ability to compute
weakest preconditions. The typical approach to weakest precon-
ditions (greatest ﬁxed-point) computation propagates facts back-
wards, but this is considered difﬁcult and therefore not many tools
exist that do this. However, although traditional iterative data ﬂow
veriﬁers fail to meet Requirements 1 and 2, there do exist some iter-
ative tools [32] that compute maximally weak solutions and there-
fore satisfy the requirements.

We have argued that maximally weak solutions for statement
unknowns si ensure valid(si), but this comes at the cost of de-
graded performance because maximally weak solutions are gener-
ated for guard and invariant unknowns too. We require maximally
weak solutions only for the statement unknowns, while for syn-
thesis we are interested in any solution to the guard and invari-
ant unknowns that satisfy the synthesis condition. In our trials, the
constraint-based scheme [21, 32] (which computes any ﬁxed-point
in the lattice rather than the greatest ﬁxed-point) outperformed the
iterative scheme [32]. In fact, our tool based on iterative approxi-
mations does not terminate for most benchmarks, and we therefore
perform the experiments using our constraint-based tool.

5. Experimental Case Studies
To evaluate our approach, we synthesized examples in three cate-
gories: First, easy to specify but tricky to program arithmetic pro-
grams; second, sorting programs, which all have the same spec-
iﬁcation but yield different sorting strategies depending on the
resource constraints; third, dynamic programming programs for
which naive solutions yield exponential runtimes, but which can
be computed in polytime by suitable memoization.

5.1

Implementation

We augmented our constraint-based veriﬁcation tools from prior
work to build more powerful veriﬁers that we use as solvers for
synthesis conditions. In this section, we summarize the capabilities
of these tools and our extensions to them. The description here
is necessarily brief due to lack of space, and more details can be
found in the companion technical report [35]. We also describe a
technique we use to simplify user input by expanding ﬂowgraphs
to be more expressive as required sometimes.

Veriﬁcation Tools Our synthesis technique relies on an underly-
ing program veriﬁcation tool. For this work, we used tools that are
part of the VS3 project [33]. We used two tools: an arithmetic veriﬁ-
cation tool [21], which we call VS3
LIA here; and a predicate abstrac-
tion veriﬁcation tool [32, 34, 20], which we call VS3
LIA and VS3

PA here.
PA are based on
the idea of reducing the problem of invariant generation to satisﬁa-
bility solving. Each tool takes as input a C program (annotated with
assertions, typically the postcondition; and assumptions, typically

Capabilities Both veriﬁcation tools VS3

the precondition) and hints about the form of the invariants. The
tool then generates invariants that sufﬁce to prove the assertions. If
the tool fails to generate the invariants, then either the assertions in
the program do not hold or no invariants exist that are instantiations
of the given template form.

• VS3

LIA works over the theory of linear arithmetic and discovers
(quantiﬁer-free) invariants in DNF form with linear inequalities
over program variables as the atomic facts. As hints, it expects
three integer parameters, maxdsj, maxcnj, maxbv. The param-
eters maxdsj and maxcnj limit the maximum number of dis-
juncts and conjuncts (in each disjunct) in the invariants. Ad-
ditionally, maxbv is a integer pair (b1, b2) for the size in bits
of invariant coefﬁcients b1 and intermediate computations b2.
None of our synthesized benchmarks required disjunctive in-
variants (maxdsj = 1), and we choose appropriate values for
maxcnj and maxbv for different benchmarks. For example, sup-
pose x, y, z are the program variables and x ≤ y ∧ z = x + 1
is the unknown program invariant. The user will specify some
value v1 for maxcnj and (v2, v3) for maxbv. VS3
LIA will setup and
solve constraints for a conjunctive invariant with atoms of the
form c0 + c1x + c2y + c3z ≥ 0. It will search for solutions to
each coefﬁcient ci assumed to have v2 bits and use v3 bits for
any intermediate values in the constraints. In this example, any
v1 ≥ 3 and any v2 ≥ 2 (one bit for the sign) will work, and we
can choose a large enough v3 to avoid overﬂows.

• VS3

PA works over a combination of the theories of equality
with uninterpreted functions, arrays, and linear arithmetic and
discovers (possibly) quantiﬁed invariants. VS3
PA expects the
boolean structure of the invariants, i.e., quantiﬁcation and dis-
junctions, to be made explicit as a template. As hints, it expects
a boolean template T (with holes for conjunctive facts) and a
set of predicates P . VS3
PA infers the subset of predicates from
P —the atoms of the conjunct—that populate the holes in T .
For example, if x ≥ 0 ∧ ∀k : 0 ≤ k ≤ x ⇒ A[k] ≤ A[k + 1]
is the invariant, then VS3
PA would discover it when run with any
T that is at least ([−] ∧ ∀k : [−] ⇒ [−]) and any P that is a
superset of {x ≥ 0, k ≥ 0, x ≥ k, A[k + 1] ≥ A[k]}, where
[−] denotes a conjunctive hole.

Extensions These tools are powerful and can infer expressive
invariants such as those requiring quantiﬁcation and disjunction,
but for some of the benchmarks, the reasoning required was beyond
even their capabilities. We therefore extended the base veriﬁers
with the following features.

• Quadratic expressions for arithmetic For handling quadratic ex-
pressions in the proofs, we implemented a sound but incom-
plete technique that renames quadratic expressions to fresh vari-
ables and then uses linear arithmetic reasoning, already built
into VS3
LIA. This sufﬁces for most of our benchmarks, except
when linear relations need to be lifted to quadratic relations,
e.g., a ≥ b ≥ 0 ⇒ a2 ≥ b2 ≥ 0. This happens in one isolated
step in the integral square root binary search case, which we
circumvent by explicitly encoding an assumption. We call this
augmented solver VS3

QA.

• Axiomatization Proposals exist for extending veriﬁcation tools
with axioms for theories they do not natively support, e.g., the
theory of reachability for lists [26]. We take such axiomatiza-
tion a step further and allow the user to specify axioms over
uninterpreted symbols that deﬁne computations. We implement
this in VS3
PA to specify the meaning of dynamic programming
programs, e.g., the deﬁnition of Fibonacci. We call this aug-
mented solver VS3

AX.

(a)
Strassens(int aij , bij ) {
v1:=(a11+a22)(b11+b22)
v2:=(a21+a22)b11
v3:=a11(b12-b22)
v4:=a22(b21-b11)
v5:=(a11+a12)b22
v6:=(a21-a11)(b11+b12)
v7:=(a12-a22)(b21+b22)
c11:=v1+v4-v5+v7
c12:=v3+v5
c21:=v2+v4
c22:=v1+v3-v2+v6
return cij ;

}
(c)
Fib(int n) {

v1:=0;v1:=1;i1:=0;
whileτ,ϕ(i1 ≤ n)

v1:=v1+v2;swap(v1, v2);
i1++;
return v1;

}
Ranking function ϕ:

x − s

Invariant τ :

v1 = Fib(i1) ∧ v2 = Fib(i1 +1)

(b)
SelSort(int A[], n) {

i1:=0;
whileτ1,ϕ1 (i1 < n − 1)

v1:=i1;
i2:=i1+1;
whileτ2,ϕ2 (i2 < n)
if (A[i2] < A[v1])
v1:=i2;

i2++;

swap(A[i1], A[v1]);
i1++;
return A;

}
Ranking functions:
ϕ1 : n − i1 − 2
ϕ2 : n − i2 − 1

Invariant τ1:

∀k1, k2 : 0 ≤ k1 < k2 < n

∧ k1 < i1 ⇒ A[k1] ≤ A[k2]

Invariant τ1:

i1 < i2 ∧ i1 ≤ v1 < n
∀k1, k2 : 0 ≤ k1 < k2 < n

∧ k1 < i1 ⇒ A[k1] ≤ A[k2]

∀k : i1 ≤ k < i2 ∧ k ≥ 0

⇒ A[v1] ≤ A[k]

Figure 2. Illustrative examples from each of the domains. (a)
Arithmetic: Strassen’s Matrix Multiplication (b) Sorting: Selec-
tion Sort (c) Dynamic Programming: Fibonacci. For simplifying
the presentation, we omit degenerate conditional branches, i.e.
true/false guards, We name the loop iteration counters L =
{i1, i2, . .} and the temporary stack variables T = {v1, v2, . .}.

Note that these extensions are to facilitate veriﬁcation and not syn-
thesis. The synthesis solver is exactly the same as the veriﬁcation
tool. Without the extensions most of our benchmarks cannot even
be veriﬁed, and thus their veriﬁcation can be seen as an independent
contribution.

Flowgraphs with Init/Final Phases
In practice a fair number of
loops have characteristic initialization and ﬁnalization phases that
exhibit behavior different from the rest of the loop. In theory, ver-
iﬁers should be able to infer loop invariants that capture such se-
mantically different phases. However, this requires disjunctive rea-
soning, which is fairly expensive if at all supported by the veriﬁer.
Instead we use an alternate expansion Expand n(T ) that introduces
acyclic fragments for the initialization and ﬁnalization if synthesis
without them fails. For instance, for Example 1, the the user only
needs to specify the ﬂowgraph ∗(◦) instead of the more compli-
cated ◦;∗(◦);◦. Except for the expansion of loops, Expand n(T )
expands all other statements exactly like Expandn(T ) does. For
loops, it builds an initialization and ﬁnalization phase as follows.
Expand n(∗(T ))=Expandn(◦);

→ Added initialization

whileτ (g) {Expand n(T );}
Expandn(◦);

→ Added ﬁnalization

specify an acyclic ﬂowgraph template Rflow
tion template Rcomp
no temporaries are used we specify Rstack
generates various versions of the program, e.g., one being

.
= ◦ and a computa-
.
= ∅ that imposes no constraints. To ensure that
.
= ∅. The synthesizer

Swap(int x, y){x := x + y; y := x − y; x := x − y; }

Strassen’s 2 × 2 Matrix Multiplication Consider Strassen’s ma-
trix multiplication, which computes the product of two n × n ma-
trices in Θ(n2.81) time instead of Θ(n3). The key to this algorithm
is an acyclic fragment that computes the product of two 2 × 2 input
matrices {aij, bij}i,j=1,2 using 7 multiplications instead of the ex-
pected 8. Used recursively, this results in asymptotic savings. We
do not attempt to synthesize the full matrix multiplication proce-
dure because it contains no signiﬁcant insight. Instead, we synthe-
size the crucial acyclic fragment, which is shown in Figure 2(a).
Here the precondition Fpre is true and the postcondition Fpost is
the conjunction of four equalities as (over the outputs {cij}i,j=1,2):
„ a11b11 + a12b21
a21b11 + a22b21

a11b12 + a12b22
a21b12 + a22b22

„ c11
c21

c12
c22

=

«

«

The synthesizer also generates many alternate versions that are
functionally equivalent to Figure 2(a).

As a side note, we also attempted synthesis using 6 multipli-
cations, which failed. This suggests that possibly no asymptoti-
cally faster solution exists using simple quadratic computations—
theoretical results up to n2.376 are known, but use products that
cannot be easily be captured in the simple domains considered here.

√

Integral Square Root Consider computing the integral square
root b
xc of a positive number x using only linear or quadratic
.
= x ≥ 1 and the postcon-
operations. The precondition is Fpre
.
= (i − 1)2 ≤ x < i2.
dition, involving the output i, is Fpost
.
We provide a single loop ﬂowgraph template Rflow
= ∗(◦) and
.
an empty computation template Rcomp
= ∅. The synthesizer gen-
erates different programs depending on the domain constraints and
the stack template:

• Rstack

• Rstack

.
= {(int, 0)} and we allow quadratic expressions in
Dexp, Dgrd. The synthesized program does a sequential search
downwards starting from i = x by continuously recomputing
and checking (i − 1)2 against x.

.
= {(int, 1)} and we only allow linear expressions in
Dexp, Dgrd. The synthesized program does a sequential search
but uses the additional local variable rather surprisingly to track
the value of (i − 1)2 using only linear updates. The synthesized
program is Example 1, from earlier.

.
= {(int, 2)} and we allow quadratic expressions in
Dexp, Dgrd. The synthesized program does a binary search for
the value of i and uses the two additional local variables to hold
the low and high end of the binary search space. To restrict
reasoning to linear arithmetic we model m = b(s1 + s2)/2c
as the assumption s1 ≤ m ≤ s2. Additionally, because of the
incompleteness in the handling of quadratic expressions, our
solver cannot derive (s2 + 1)2 ≤ s2
1 from s2 + 1 ≤ s1. Thus
we provide the quadratic inequality as another assumption.

• Rstack

5.2 Algorithms that use arithmetic

For this category, we pick Dprf to be quadratic arithmetic and use
as our solver the VS3
QA tool. We chose a set of arithmetic benchmarks
with simple-to-state functional speciﬁcations but each containing
some tricky insight that human programmers may miss.

Swapping without Temporaries Consider a program that swaps
two integer-valued variables without using a temporary. The pre-
.
condition and postcondition to the program are speciﬁed as Fpost
=
.
= (x = c1 ∧y = c2), respectively. We
(x = c2 ∧y = c1) and Fpre

We specify the precondition Fpre

Bresenham’s Line Drawing Algorithm Consider Bresenham’s
line drawing algorithm, as we discussed in Section 1.1. For efﬁ-
ciency, the algorithm only uses linear updates, which are non-trivial
to verify [16] or even understand (let alone discover from scratch).
.
= 0 < Y ≤ X. The post-
condition can be written as a quantiﬁed assertion outside the loop
or as a quantiﬁer-free assertion inside the loop, as mentioned in
Section 1.1. We choose to annotate the ﬂowgraph with the simpler
quantiﬁer-free 2|y − (Y /X)x| ≤ 1 at the loop header and addi-
tionally specify that the loop iterates over x = 0 . . X. This simpli-

ﬁcation in the implementation allowed us to use VS3
supports quantiﬁer-free facts.

We specify a single loop ﬂowgraph Rflow

.
= ∗(◦) and empty
.
stack and computation templates Rstack
= ∅. The
synthesizer generates multiple versions, one of which is exactly
as shown in Figure 1(b) and can be translated to the program in
Figure 1(a).

.
= ∅, Rcomp

QA, which only

5.3 Sorting Algorithms

For this category, we pick Dprf to be the theory supported by
VS3
PA, which we use as our solver. The current version of our
tool works with a user-supplied set of predicates. We are working
on predicate inference techniques—in the style of CEGAR-based
model checkers [23]—but for now, we give the tool a candidate set
of predicates.

The sortedness speciﬁcation consists of the precondition Fpre

.
=
.
true and the postcondition Fpost
= ∀k : 0 ≤ k < n ⇒ A[k] ≤
A[k + 1]. The full functional speciﬁcation would also ensure that
the output array is a permutation of the input, but verifying—and
thus, synthesizing—the full speciﬁcation is outside the capabilities
of most tools today.

We therefore use a mechanism to limit the space of programs to
desirable sorting algorithms, while still only using Fpost. We limit
Dexp to those that only involve operations that maintain elements—
for example, swapping elements or moving elements to unoccupied
locations. Using this mechanism, we ensure that invalid algorithms
(that replicate or lose array elements) are not considered.

Non-recursive sorting algorithms Consider comparison-based
sorting programs that are composed of nested loops. We specify a
.
ﬂowgraph template Rflow
= ∗(∗(◦)) and a computation template
Rcomp that limits the operations to swapping of array values.

• Rstack

.
= ∅: The synthesizer produces two sorting programs
that are valid with respect to the scaffold. One corresponds to
Bubble Sort and the other is a non-standard version of Insertion
Sort. The standard version of Insertion Sort uses a temporary
variable to hold the inserted object. Since we do not provide a
temporary variable, the synthesized program moves the inserted
element by swapping it with its neighbor, while still performing
operations similar to Insertion Sort.

.
= {(int, 1)}: The synthesizer produces another sorting
program that uses the temporary variable to hold an array index.
This program corresponds to Selection Sort and is shown in Fig-
ure 2(b). Notice the non-trivial invariants and ranking functions
that are synthesized alongside for each of the loops.

• Rstack

Recursive divide-and-conquer sorting Consider comparison-
based sorting programs that use recursion. We make a few simple
modiﬁcations to the system to specify recursive programs. First, we
introduce a terminal string “~” to the ﬂowgraph template language
(Eq. 2), representing a recursive call. Let (Fpre( ~vin), Fpost( ~vout))
denote the functional speciﬁcation. Then we augment the expan-
sion (Section 3.2) to handle the new ﬂowgraph string as follows:
Expandn(~) = choose{[]true → srecur}

0) ⇒ Fpost( ~vout

00))∧sret sets val-
where srecur = sargs ∧(Fpre( ~vin
ues to the arguments of the recursive call (using sargs), assumes the
00), with
0) ⇒ Fpost( ~vout
effect of the recursive call (using Fpre( ~vin
0 and the return variables re-
the input arguments renamed to ~vin
00) and lastly, outputs the returned values into program
named to ~vout
variables (using sret). The statements sargs, sret take the form:
0, ei ∈ Dexp|Vars
i xi = ei where xi ∈ ~vin
i xi = ei where xi ∈ Vars, ei ∈ Dexp| ~vout

sargs = V
sret = V

00

Here Vars denote the variables of the procedure (the input, output
and local stack variables). We also tweak the statement concretiza-

tion function (Section 4) to output a recursive call statement rec:

Stmt(Fpre( ~vin

0) ⇒ Fpost( ~vout

00)) = ~vout

00 := rec( ~vin

0)

We specify a computation template that allows only swapping or
moving of elements. We then try different values of the ﬂowgraph
and stack templates:

• Rflow

.
= ~;~;◦ (two recursive calls followed by an acyclic
.
fragment) and Rstack
= ∅: The synthesizer produces a program
that recursively sorts subparts and then combines the results.
This corresponds to Merge Sort.

.
= ◦;~;~ (an acyclic fragment followed by two recursive
.
calls) and Rstack
= {(int, 1)}: The synthesizer produces a
program that partitions the elements and then recursively sorts
the subparts. This corresponds to Quick Sort.

• Rflow

5.4 Dynamic Programming Algorithms
For this category, we pick Dprf to be the theory supported by VS3
AX,
which we use as our solver. As in the previous section, since our
tool does not currently infer predicates, we give it a candidate set.
We choose all the textbook dynamic programming examples [8]
and attempt to synthesize them from their functional speciﬁcations.
The ﬁrst hurdle (even for veriﬁcation) for these algorithms is
that the meaning of the computation is not easily speciﬁed. To
address this issue, we need support for axioms, which are typically
recursive deﬁnitions.

Deﬁnitional Axioms The veriﬁcation tool allows the user to de-
ﬁne the meaning of a computation as an uninterpreted symbol, with
(recursive) quantiﬁed facts deﬁning the semantics of the symbol ax-
iomatically. For example, the semantics of Fibonacci are deﬁned in
terms of the symbol Fib and the three axioms:

Fib(0) = 0 ∧ Fib(1) = 1
∀k : k ≥ 0 ⇒ Fib(k + 2) = Fib(k + 1) + Fib(k)
The tool passes the given symbol and its deﬁnitional axioms to the
underlying theorem prover (Z3 [10]), which assumes the axioms
before every theorem proving query. With this interpretation of the
symbol Fib known to the theorem prover, the veriﬁer can now pose
theorem proving queries involving the symbol Fib. For instance,
the iterative program for Fibonacci maintains an invariant of the
form x = Fib(i), which the veriﬁer can now infer. This allows the
tool to verify dynamic programming programs that are typically
iterative, relating them to the recursive deﬁnitional axioms.

Even with veriﬁcation in place, automatic synthesis of these
programs involves three non-trivial tasks for the synthesizer. First,
the synthesizer needs to automatically discover a strategy for
translating the recursion (in the functional speciﬁcation) to non-
recursive iteration (for the actual computation). The functional
speciﬁcations do not contain this information, e.g., in the speciﬁca-
tion for Fibonacci above, the iteration strategy for the computation
is not evident. Second, the synthesizer needs to take the (non-
directional) equalities in the speciﬁcations and impose directional-
ity such that elements are computed in the right order. For example,
for Fibonacci the synthesizer needs to automatically discover that
Fib(k) and Fib(k + 1) should be computed before Fib(k + 2).
Third, the synthesizer needs to discover an efﬁcient memoization
strategy for only those results needed for future computations, to ﬁt
the computation in the space provided—which is one of the bene-
ﬁts of dynamic programming algorithms. For example, Fibonacci
can be computed using only two additional memory locations by
suitable memoization. Fortunately, just by specifying the resource
constraints and using our proof-theoretic approach the synthesizer
is able to perform these tasks and synthesize dynamic programming
algorithms from their recursive functional speciﬁcations.

Also, as in the case of sorting, we want to disallow completely
arbitrary computations. In sorting, we could uniformly restrict the

expression language to only swap and move operations. For dy-
namic programming, the speciﬁcation of the operations is problem-
speciﬁc. For instance, for shortest path, we only want to allow the
path matrix updates that correspond to valid paths, e.g., disallow
arbitrary multiplication of path weights. Rcomp speciﬁes these con-
straints by only permitting updates through certain predicates.

Dynamic programming solutions typically have an initialization
phase (init-loop) and then a phase (work-loop) that ﬁlls the appro-
priate entries in the table. Therefore, we chose a Rflow with an init-
loop (∗(◦)) followed by a work-loop.

By specifying a ﬂowgraph template Rflow

.
= ∗(◦);∗(◦) and a
stack template with no additional variables (except for the case of
.
Fibonacci, where the synthesizer required Rstack
= {(int, 2)}),
we were able to synthesize the following four examples:

Fibonacci Consider computing the nth Fibonacci number from
the functional speciﬁcation as above. Our synthesizer generates
a program that memoizes the solutions to the two subproblems
Fib(i1) and Fib(i1 + 1) in the i1th iteration. It maintains a sliding
window for the two subproblems and stores their solutions in the
two additional stack variables. The synthesized program along with
its invariant and ranking function is shown in Figure 2(c).

Checkerboard Consider computing the least-cost path in a rect-
angular grid (with costs at each grid location), from the bottom
row to the top row. The functional speciﬁcation states the path cost
for a grid location in terms of the path costs for possible previous
locations (i.e., below left, below or below right). Our synthesizer
generates a program that ﬁnds the minimum cost paths.

Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) Consider computing the
longest common substring that appears in the same order in two
given input strings (as arrays of characters). The recursive func-
tional speciﬁcation relates the cost of a substring against the cost
of substrings with one fewer character. Our synthesizer generates a
program for LCS.

Single Source Shortest Path Consider computing the least-cost
path from a designated source to all other nodes where the weight
of edges is given given as a cost function for each source and
destination pair. The recursive functional speciﬁcation states the
cost structure for all nodes in terms of the cost structure of all nodes
if one fewer hop is allowed. Our synthesizer generates a program
for the single source shortest path problem.

For the following two examples, synthesis failed with the sim-
pler work-loop, but we synthesize the examples by specifying a
ﬂowgraph template ∗(◦);∗(∗(◦)) and no additional stack variables:

All-pairs Shortest Path Consider computing all-pairs shortest
paths using a recursive functional speciﬁcation similar to the one
we used for single source shortest path. Our synthesizer times out
for this example. We therefore attempt synthesis by (i) specifying
the acyclic fragments and synthesizing the guards, and (ii) spec-
ifying the guards and synthesizing the acyclic fragments. In each
case, our synthesizer generates the other component, corresponding
to Floyd-Warshall’s algorithm.

Matrix Chain Multiply Consider computing the optimal way to
multiply a matrix chain. Depending on the bracketing, the total
number of multiplications varies. We wish to ﬁnd the bracketing
that minimizes the number of multiplications. E.g., if we use the
simple n3 multiplication for two matrices, then A10×100B100×1C1×50
can either takes 1,500 multiplications for (AB)C or 55,000 mul-
tiplications for A(BC). The functional speciﬁcation deﬁnes the
cost of multiplying a particular chain of matrices in terms of the
cost of a chain with one fewer element. Our synthesizer generates
a program that computes the optimal matrix bracketing.

Benchmark
Swap two
Strassen’s
Sqrt (linear search)
Sqrt (binary search)
Bresenham’s

maxcnj
0
0
4
3
6

maxbv
2, 6
2, 6
2, 6
2, 8
2, 5

Assumes
0
0
0
2
0

Table 1. Parameters used for synthesis using VS3
QA. For each bench-
mark, we list the maximum number of conjuncts in any invariant
(maxcnj) and bit vector sizes (maxbv, for constants and for bit-
blasting), respectively. The last column lists any assumes we man-
ually speciﬁed.

Benchmark

Bubble Sort
Insertion Sort
Selection Sort
Merge Sort
Quick Sort
Fibonacci
Checkerboard
Longest Common Subseq.
Matrix Chain Multiply
Single-Src Shortest Path
All-pairs Shortest Path

Defn.
Axioms
0
0
0
0
0
3
5
6
7
3
10

Number of
Templates,
Predicates
3, 17
3, 16
3, 20
4, 16
3, 15
1, 12
2, 8
2, 13
2, 18
3, 16
4, 19

Annot. or
Assumes
1
1
1
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 2. Parameters used for synthesis using VS3
AX. For each bench-
mark, we list the number of deﬁnitional axioms required to specify
the meaning of the computation. Additionally, we list the number
of invariant templates and size of predicate set given to VS3
AX. The
last column lists any annotations or assumes we manually speciﬁed.

QA and VS3

5.5 Performance
Parameters for VS3
AX Table 1 lists the parameters re-
quired to run VS3
QA over our arithmetic benchmarks. The second
column lists the maximum number of conjuncts (maxcnj) expected
in each invariant. The third column lists the bit vector sizes (maxbv)
used for invariant coefﬁcients and intermediate values. The last col-
umn lists the assumptions we manually provided.

We guessed reasonable values for maxcnj for the programs with
loops. We started with a small value and iteratively increased it if
synthesis failed. For the bit-vector sizes, we choose two bits for
the coefﬁcients since we were not expecting large coefﬁcients in
the invariants. We then chose reasonable values (5–8) for the bit-
vector size for intermediate computations. There was only one case,
square root using binary search, where we had to specify a manual
assertion, as discussed earlier. In all, little user effort was required.
AX over our sort-
ing and dynamic programming benchmarks. The second column
lists the number of deﬁnitional axioms required for specifying the
meaning of the computation and are required even for veriﬁcation.
The third column lists the number of templates and predicates used.
The last column lists the number of annotations or assumptions that
were manually provided.

Table 2 lists the parameters required to run VS3

The templates contain conjunctive holes and explicit quantiﬁca-
tion and disjunction. For each benchmark, there is one quantiﬁer-
free, disjunction-less, template and the remaining are universally
quantiﬁed with a form almost identical to the postcondition, and
therefore easy to write out. All invariants are conjunctions of the
templates with their holes instantiated with a subset (conjunction)
of the predicate set. The predicates are atomic relations between
linear and array expression over program variables and constants.
We specify a suitable predicate set for each benchmark. We start
with a candidate set and then iteratively added predicates when syn-

Benchmark

A
3Q
S
V
(

) Swap two
Strassen’s
Sqrt (linear search)
Sqrt (binary search)
Bresenham’s
) Bubble Sort

.
h
t
i
r

A

A
3P
S
V
(

g
n
i
t
r
o
S

Insertion Sort
Selection Sort
Merge Sort
Quick Sort
) Fibonacci

X
3A
S
V
(

.
g
o
r
P
c
i
m
a
n
y
D

Checkerboard
Longest Common Subseq.
Matrix Chain Multiply
Single-Src Shortest Path
All-pairs Shortest Path1

Verif.
0.11
0.11
0.84
0.63
166.54
1.27
2.49
23.77
18.86
1.74
0.37
0.39
0.53
6.85
46.58

112.28

Synthesis
0.12
4.98
9.96
1.83
9658.52
3.19
5.41
164.57
50.00
160.57
5.90
0.96
14.23
88.35
124.01
(i) 226.71
(ii) 750.11

Ratio
1.09
45.27
11.86
2.90
58.00
2.51
2.17
6.92
2.65
92.28
15.95
2.46
26.85
12.90
2.66
(i) 2.02
(ii) 6.68

Table 3. (a) Arithmetic (b) Sorting (c) Dynamic Programming. For
each category, we indicate the tool used both for veriﬁcation and
synthesis. For each benchmark, we indicate the time in seconds to
solve the veriﬁcation conditions and the synthesis conditions, and
the slowdown for synthesis compared to veriﬁcation.

thesis failed. We needed at most 20 predicates, which were easily
found for each benchmark. In the interest of space, we omit the
exact templates and predicates used for each benchmark, but they
can be found in the companion technical report [35]. For each of
the sorting programs with a nested loop structure (Bubble, Inser-
tion and Selection Sort), the outer loop invariant is redundant given
the inner loop invariant. Therefore, we tag the outer loop—the one
annotation each case—and the solver does not to attempt to gener-
ate its invariant, improving performance. For Merge Sort, synthe-
sis fails unless we reduce the search space by manually specifying
three simple quantiﬁer-free atomic facts of the invariant. In all, little
user effort was required.

Runtimes Table 3 presents the performance of a constraint-based
synthesizer over arithmetic, sorting and dynamic programming
benchmarks using the parameters from Tables 1 and 2. All run-
times are median of three runs, measured in seconds. We measure
the time for veriﬁcation and the time for synthesis using the same
tool. The total synthesis time varies between 0.12–9658.52 sec-
onds, depending on the difﬁculty of the benchmark, with a median
runtime of 14.23 seconds. The factor slowdown for synthesis varies
between 1.09–92.28 with a median of 6.68.

The benchmarks we used are considered difﬁcult even for veri-
ﬁcation. Consequently the low average runtimes for proof-theoretic
synthesis are encouraging. Also, the slowdown for synthesis com-
pared to veriﬁcation is acceptable, and shows that we can indeed
exploit the advances in veriﬁcation to our advantage for synthesis.

5.6 Limitations and Future Work

Our synthesis system borrows the limitations of the underlying ver-
iﬁers. Speciﬁcally, we added assumptions for two cases, binary
search square root and merge sort, to compensate for the incom-
plete handling of quadratic expressions by VS3
QA and inefﬁciency
of VS3
AX, respectively. Similarly, we have to specify a set of can-
didate predicates for VS3
AX—an overhead that can be alleviated us-
ing predicate inference techniques. For our experiments, this meant
that at times, our guesses were not sufﬁcient, and synthesis only
succeeded after a ﬁrst few failed attempts which were used to iter-
atively reﬁne the set of predicates, akin to a manual run of CE-

1 These timings are for separately (i) synthesizing the loop guards, and for
(ii) synthesizing the acyclic fragments.

GAR [4]. Aside from these avoidable incompleteness issues of
veriﬁers, there are two major concerns for any synthesis system,
namely scalability and relevance.

Scalability The synthesis conditions we generate are tractable for
current solvers, even though these benchmarks are considered some
of the most difﬁcult even to verify. Yet, the synthesis conditions
are not trivial, as illustrated by the need to annotate three of the
sorting benchmarks to omit invariants for their outer loops. With
the current system we expect to be able to synthesize programs that
have more lines of code, but for which the reasoning involved is not
as complicated as in our benchmarks. But to synthesize programs
that are larger and involve more complicated reasoning, more
efﬁcient veriﬁers are needed.

Relevance Any solution to the synthesis conditions is a valid
terminating program that satisﬁes the scaffold speciﬁcation. But
there may be multiple valid ones that may differ, for instance, in
cache behavior, runtime performance, or readability. Currently, we
do not prioritize the synthesized programs in any manner, but for
completeness we let the solver enumerate solutions. To get another
solution, we assert the negation of a solution generated in a step
and iteratively ask for the next solution. Notice though that the
synthesis times reported in Table 3 are for generating the ﬁrst
of those solutions. We envision that in the future, we can either
augment synthesis conditions with constraints about relevance or
use a postprocessing step to prioritize and pick relevant solutions
from those enumerated.

6. Related Work
Proof-theoretic program synthesis Dijkstra [14], Gries [18] and
Wirth [38] advocated that programmers write program that are
correct-by-construction by manually developing the proof of cor-
rectness alongside the program. Because techniques for efﬁcient
invariant inference were unavailable in the past, synthesis was con-
sidered intractable [12]. Recently, scheme-guided synthesis [17]
has been proposed but specialized to the arithmetic domain [5].
Categorizations of approaches as constructive/deductive synthesis,
schema-guided synthesis and inductive synthesis are presented in
a recent survey [1]. Our approach can be seen as midway be-
tween constructive/deductive synthesis and schema-guided synthe-
sis. Some researchers proposed heuristic techniques for automa-
tion, but they cater to a very limited schematic of programs are
limited in their applicability [15]. In this paper, we have shown that
veriﬁcation has reached a point where automatic synthesis is feasi-
ble.

Extracting program from proofs The semantics of program
loops is related to mathematical induction. There, an inductive
proof of the theorem induced by a program speciﬁcation can be
used to extract a program [27]. Using signiﬁcant human input, the-
orems proved interactively in the Coq have a computational analog
that can be extracted [2]. The difﬁculty is that the theorem is of
the whole program, and proves that an output exists for the spec-
iﬁcation. Such a theorem is much more difﬁcult than the simple
theorem proving queries generated by the veriﬁcation tool.

Sketching Instead of a declarative speciﬁcation of the desired
computation as we use, combinatorial sketching [29, 30, 31] uses
an unoptimized program as the speciﬁcation. A model checker
eliminates invalid candidate programs that the synthesizer gener-
ates. Loops are handled in a novel but incomplete manner, by un-
rolling, or by using a predeﬁned skeleton, or by using domain spe-
ciﬁc loop ﬁnitization tricks [29] that are not applicable when syn-
thesizing true unbounded loops (which our approach synthesizes
naturally using safety and liveness constraints). Sketching does not

inherently generate the proof, although postprocessing steps can
ensure correctness [30], while our approach produces the program,
and the proof.

Model checking-based synthesis of automata Seminal work
on model checking [3] proposed synthesizing synchronization
skeletons—a problem that has recently seen renewed interest [36,
37]. Synthesis from LTL speciﬁcation has also been consid-
ered [28]. For the case of reactive systems, proposals exist that
reduce the synthesis problem to a game between the environment
and the synthesizer where the winning strategy corresponds to the
synthesized program. Recently, this approach has also been ap-
plied to program repair [25, 19], which can be seen as restricted
program synthesis. Despite optimizations [24], the practicality of
these approaches for complete program synthesis remains unclear.

7. Conclusions
We have presented a principled approach to synthesis that treats
synthesis as a generalized veriﬁcation problem. The novelty of
our approach lies in generating synthesis conditions, which are
composed of safety conditions, well-formedness conditions, and
progress conditions, such that a satisfying solution to the syn-
thesis conditions corresponds to a synthesized program. We have
been able to use veriﬁcation tools to synthesize programs, and, si-
multaneously, their proof (invariants, ranking functions). We have
demonstrated the viability of our approach by synthesizing difﬁ-
cult examples in the three domains of arithmetic, sorting, and dy-
namic programming, all in very reasonable time. We believe the
reason for the practicality of our approach is the interplay between
the proof (invariants) and the statements. Speciﬁcally, by setting
up constraints with both statement and proof unknowns together,
statements that do not have a corresponding proof are efﬁciently
eliminated. We believe this is the ﬁrst proposal that leverages this
insight for efﬁcient and automatic program synthesis.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in parts by the grants CCF-0430118 and
CCF-0346982. We would also like to thank Avik Chaudhuri, El-
natan Reisner, and the other anonymous reviewers, for their invalu-
able feedback.

References

[1] D. Basin, Y. DeVille, P. Flener, A. Hamfelt, and J. F. NIlsson.
Synthesis of programs in computational logic. In LNCS 3049.

[2] Yves Bertot and Pierre Casteran. Interactive Theorem Proving and

Program Development. SpringerVerlag, 2004.

[3] Edmund M. Clarke and E. Allen Emerson. Design and synthesis of
synchronization skeletons using branching-time temporal logic. In
Logic of Programs, pages 52–71. Springer-Verlag, 1982.

[4] Edmund M. Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu, and
Helmut Veith. Counterexample-guided abstraction reﬁnement. In
CAV ’00, pages 154–169, 2000.

[5] Michael Col´on. Schema-guided synthesis of imperative programs by

constraint solving. In LOPSTR, pages 166–181, 2004.

[6] Michael Col´on, Sriram Sankaranarayanan, and Henny Sipma. Linear
invariant generation using non-linear constraint solving. In CAV’03.

[7] Byron Cook, Andreas Podelski, and Andrey Rybalchenko. Termina-
tion proofs for systems code. In PLDI ’06, pages 415–426, 2006.

[8] T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, and R. Rivest. Introduction to Algorithms.

[9] P. Cousot and R. Cousot. Abstract interpretation a uniﬁed lattice

model for static analysis of programs by construction or approxima-
tion of ﬁxpoints. In POPL’77.

[10] Leonardo de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3, 2008. http://

research.microsoft.com/projects/Z3/.

[11] Edsger W. Dijkstra. Guarded commands, nondeterminacy and formal
derivation of programs. Communications of the ACM, 18(8):453–457.

[12] Edsger W. Dijkstra. A constructive approach to the problem of

program correctness. BIT Numerical Math., 8(3):174–186, 1968.

[13] Edsger W. Dijkstra and Carel S. Scholten. Predicate Calculus and

Program Semantics. Texts and Monographs in CS. 1990.

[14] Edsger Wybe Dijkstra. A Discipline of Programming. 1976.

[15] Joe W. Duran. Heuristics for program synthesis using loop invariants.

In ACM ’78, pages 891–900, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

[16] Jean-Christophe Filliˆatre. Using SMT solvers for deductive

veriﬁcation of C and Java programs. In SMT’08.

[17] Pierre Flener, Kung-Kiu Lau, Mario Ornaghi, and Julian Richardson.
An abstract formalization of correct schemas for program synthesis.
J. Symb. Comput., 30(1):93–127, 2000.

[18] David Gries. The Science of Programming. 1987.

[19] Andreas Griesmayer, Paul Bloem Roderick, and Byron Cook. Repair

of boolean programs with an application to C. In CAV’06.

[20] Sumit Gulwani, Saurabh Srivastava, and Ramarathnam Venkatesan.
Constraint-based invariant inference over predicate abstraction. In
VMCAI’09.

[21] Sumit Gulwani, Saurabh Srivastava, and Ramarathnam Venkatesan.
Program analysis as constraint solving. In PLDI ’08, pages 281–292.

[22] Matthew S. Hecht and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Flow graph reducibility. In
STOC ’72, pages 238–250, New York, NY, USA, 1972. ACM.

[23] Thomas A. Henzinger, Ranjit Jhala, Rupak Majumdar, and Kenneth L.

McMillan. Abstractions from proofs. In POPL ’04, 2004.

[24] Barbara Jobstmann and Roderick Bloem. Optimizations for LTL
synthesis. In FMCAD ’06, pages 117–124. IEEE Computer Society.

[25] Barbara Jobstmann, Andreas Griesmayer, and Roderick Paul Bloem.

Program repair as a game. In CAV’05, pages 226 – 238.

[26] Shuvendu Lahiri and Shaz Qadeer. Back to the future: revisiting
precise program veriﬁcation using SMT solvers. In POPL ’08.

[27] Zohar Manna and Richard J. Waldinger. Toward automatic program
synthesis. Communications of the ACM, 14(3):151–165, 1971.

[28] A. Pnueli and R. Rosner. On the synthesis of a reactive module. In

POPL ’89, pages 179–190, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

[29] Armando Solar-Lezama, Gilad Arnold, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav

Bodik, Vijay Saraswat, and Sanjit Seshia. Sketching stencils.
PLDI ’07, pages 167–178, New York, NY, USA. ACM.

In

[30] Armando Solar-Lezama, Christopher Grant Jones, and Rastislav

Bodik. Sketching concurrent data structures. In PLDI ’08.

[31] Armando Solar-Lezama, Rodric Rabbah, Rastislav Bod´ık, and Kemal
Ebcio˘glu. Programming by sketching for bit-streaming programs. In
PLDI ’05.

[32] Saurabh Srivastava and Sumit Gulwani. Program veriﬁcation using

templates over predicate abstraction. In PLDI ’09.

[33] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, and Jeffrey S. Foster. VS3.

http://www.cs.umd.edu/~saurabhs/pacs/.

[34] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, and Jeffrey S. Foster. VS3: SMT

solvers for program veriﬁcation. In CAV ’09.

[35] Saurabh Srivastava, Sumit Gulwani, and Jeffrey S. Foster. Proof-
theoretic program synthesis: From program veriﬁcation to program
synthesis. Technical report, Microsoft Research, Redmond, 2009.

[36] Martin Vechev, Eran Yahav, and Greta Yorsh. Inferring synchroniza-

tion under limited observability. In TACAS’09, 2009.

[37] Martin Vechev, Eran Yahav, and Greta Yorsh. Abstraction-guided

synthesis. In POPL’10, 2010.

[38] Nicholas Wirth. Systematic Programming: An Introduction. 1973.

